Canadian Symbols
Canada has many important symbols — objects, events, and
people that have special meaning. Together they help explain
what it means to be Canadian and express our national
identity. Important Canadian symbols appear throughout this
booklet.
Picture: (From Left to Right) Mace of the House of Commons,
Ottawa. Canadian flag of 1965. The Royal Arms of Canada.
Parliament at dusk.
Picture: The Snowbirds (431 Air Demonstration Squadron) are
a Canadian icon
THE CANADIAN CROWN
The Crown has been a symbol of the state in Canada for 400
years. Canada has been a constitutional monarchy in its own
right since Confederation in 1867 during Queen Victoria’s
reign. Queen Elizabeth II, who has been Queen of Canada
since 1952, marked her Golden Jubilee in 2002, and
celebrated her Diamond Jubilee (60 years as Sovereign) in
2012. The Crown is a symbol of government, including
Parliament, the legislatures, the courts, police services and the
Canadian Forces.

78
	  

FLAGS IN CANADA
A new Canadian flag was raised for the first time in 1965. The
red-white-red pattern comes from the flag of the Royal Military
College, Kingston, founded in 1876. Red and white had been
colours of France and England since the Middle Ages and the
national colours of Canada since 1921. The Union Jack is our
official Royal Flag. The Canadian Red Ensign served as the
Canadian flag for about 100 years. The provinces and
territories also have flags that embody their distinct traditions.
Picture: The Canadian Red Ensign served as the national flag
for 100 years, and has been carried officially by veterans since
2005
THE MAPLE LEAF
The maple leaf is Canada’s best-known symbol. Maple leaves
were adopted as a symbol by French-Canadians in the 1700s,
have appeared on Canadian uniforms and insignia since the
1850s, and are carved into the headstones of our fallen
soldiers buried overseas and in Canada.
THE FLEUR-DE-LYS
It is said that the lily flower (“fleur-de-lys”) was adopted by the
French king in the year 496. It became the symbol of French
royalty for more than 1,000 years, including the colony of New
France. Revived at Confederation, the fleur-de-lys was
included in the Canadian Red Ensign. In 1948 Quebec adopted
its own flag, based on the Cross and the fleur-de-lys (see
p.47).
79
	  

COAT OF ARMS AND MOTTO
As an expression of national pride after the First World War,
Canada adopted an official coat of arms and a national motto,
A Mari Usque Ad Mare, which in Latin means “from sea to sea.”
The arms contain symbols of England, France, Scotland and
Ireland as well as red maple leaves. Today the arms can be
seen on dollar bills, government documents and public
buildings.
PARLIAMENT BUILDINGS
The towers, arches, sculptures and stained glass of the
Parliament Buildings embody the French, English and
Aboriginal traditions and the Gothic Revival architecture
popular in the time of Queen Victoria. The buildings were
completed in the 1860s. The Centre Block was destroyed by an
accidental fire in 1916 and rebuilt in 1922. The Library is the
only part of the original building remaining. The Peace Tower
was completed in 1927 in memory of the First World War. The
Memorial Chamber within the Tower contains the Books of
Remembrance in which are written the names of soldiers,
sailors and airmen who died serving Canada in wars or while
on duty.
The provincial legislatures are architectural treasures. The
Quebec National Assembly is built in the French Second
Empire style, while the legislatures of the other provinces are
Baroque, Romanesque and neoclassical, reflecting the GrecoRoman heritage of Western civilization in which democracy
originated.
80
	  

POPULAR SPORTS
Hockey is Canada’s most popular spectator sport and is
considered to be the national winter sport. Ice hockey was
developed in Canada in the 1800s. The National Hockey
League plays for the championship Stanley Cup, donated by
Lord Stanley, the Governor General, in 1892. The Clarkson
Cup, established in 2005 by Adrienne Clarkson, the 26th
Governor General (and the first of Asian origin), is awarded for
women’s hockey. Many young Canadians play hockey at
school, in a hockey league or on quiet streets—road hockey or
street hockey—and are taken to the hockey rink by their
parents. Canadian children have collected hockey cards for
generations.
Canadian football is the second most popular sport (see page
49). Curling, an ice game introduced by Scottish pioneers, is
popular. Lacrosse, an ancient sport first played by Aboriginals,
is the official summer sport. Soccer has the most registered
players of any game in Canada.
Picture: (Left) Montreal Canadiens Stanley Cup champions,
1978

81
	  

THE BEAVER
The beaver was adopted centuries ago as a symbol of the
Hudson’s Bay Company. It became an emblem of the St. Jean
Baptiste Society, a French-Canadian patriotic association, in
1834, and was also adopted by other groups. This industrious
rodent can be seen on the five-cent coin, on the coats of arms
of Saskatchewan and Alberta, and of cities such as Montreal
and Toronto.
Picture: (From Top to Bottom) RCMP Musical Ride, Ottawa,
Ontario. The industrious beaver.
CANADA’S OFFICIAL LANGUAGES
English and French are the two official languages and are
important symbols of identity. English speakers (Anglophones)
and French speakers (Francophones) have lived together in
partnership and creative tension for more than 300 years. You
must have adequate knowledge of English or French to
become a Canadian citizen. Adult applicants 55 years of age
or over are exempted from this requirement.

82
	  

Parliament passed the Official Languages Act in 1969. It has
three main objectives:
• Establish equality between French and English in
Parliament, the Government of Canada and institutions
subject to the Act;
• Maintain and develop official language minority
communities in Canada; and
• Promote equality of French and English in Canadian
society.

83
	  

NATIONAL ANTHEM
O Canada was proclaimed as the national anthem in 1980. It
was first sung in Québec City in 1880. French and English
Canadians sing different words to the national anthem.
O Canada
O Canada! Our home and native land!
True patriot love in all thy sons command
With glowing hearts we see thee rise
The true North strong and free!
From far and wide, O Canada
We stand on guard for thee
God keep our land glorious and free!
O Canada, we stand on guard for thee
O Canada, we stand on guard for thee
Ô Canada
Ô Canada! Terre de nos aïeux,
Ton front est ceint de fleurons glorieux!
Car ton bras sait porter l’épée,
Il sait porter la croix!
Ton histoire est une épopée
Des plus brillants exploits.
Et ta valeur, de foi trempée,
Protégera nos foyers et nos droits.
Protégera nos foyers et nos droits.
84
	  

ROYAL ANTHEM
The Royal Anthem of Canada, “God Save the Queen (or
King),” can be played or sung on any occasion when
Canadians wish to honour the Sovereign.
God Save the Queen
God Save our gracious Queen!
Long live our noble Queen!
God save the Queen!
Send her victorious,
Happy and glorious,
Long to reign over us,
God save the Queen!
Dieu protège la reine
Dieu protège la Reine!
De sa main souveraine!
Vive la Reine!
Qu’un règne glorieux,
Long et victorieux,
Rende son peuple heureux,
Vive la Reine!

85
	  

THE ORDER OF CANADA AND OTHER HONOURS
All countries have ways to recognize outstanding citizens.
Official awards are called honours, consisting of orders,
decorations, and medals. After using British honours for many
years, Canada started its own honours system with the Order
of Canada in 1967, the centennial of Confederation.
If you know of fellow citizens who you think are worthy of
recognition, you are welcome to nominate them. Information on
nominations for many of these honours can be found at
www.gg.ca/document.aspx?id=70?&lan=eng.
Picture: Jazz pianist Oscar Peterson (left) receives the Order of
Canada from Roland Michener (right), the 20th Governor
General, in 1973. In the centre are Norah Michener and a
portrait of Vincent Massey, the 18th Governor General
THE VICTORIA CROSS
The Victoria Cross (V.C.) is the highest honour available to
Canadians and is awarded for the most conspicuous bravery, a
daring or pre-eminent act of valour or self-sacrifice, or extreme
devotion to duty in the presence of the enemy. The V.C. has
been awarded to 96 Canadians since 1854, including:
• Then lieutenant Alexander Roberts Dunn, born in presentday Toronto, served in the British Army in the Charge of
the Light Brigade at Balaclava (1854) in the Crimean War,
and was the first Canadian to be awarded the Victoria
Cross.
86
	  

• Able Seaman William Hall of Horton, Nova Scotia, whose
parents were American slaves, was the first black man to
be awarded the V.C. for his role in the Siege of Lucknow
during the Indian Rebellion of 1857.
• Corporal Filip Konowal, born in Ukraine, showed
exceptional courage in the Battle of Hill 70 in 1917, and
became the first member of the Canadian Corps not born
in the British Empire to be awarded the V.C.
• Flying ace Captain Billy Bishop, born in Owen Sound,
Ontario, earned the V.C. in the Royal Flying Corps during
the First World War, and was later an honorary Air
Marshal of the Royal Canadian Air Force.
• Captain Paul Triquet of Cabano, Quebec, earned the V.C.
leading his men and a handful of tanks in the attack on
Casa Berardi in Italy in 1943 during the Second World
War, and was later a Brigadier.
• Lieutenant Robert Hampton Gray, a navy pilot born in
Trail, B.C., was killed while bombing and sinking a
Japanese warship in August 1945, a few days before the
end of the Second World War, and was the last Canadian
to receive the V.C. to date.
Picture: (From Left to Right) Col. Alexander Roberts Dunn, V.C.
Able Seaman William Hall, V.C. Brigadier Paul Triquet, V.C.
Filip Konowal, V.C., was promoted Sergeant.

87
	  

Picture: (From Top to Bottom) Air Marshal William A. Bishop,
better known as flying ace Billy Bishop, V.C. Lieutenant Robert
Hampton Gray, V.C.

88
	  

NATIONAL PUBLIC HOLIDAYS AND OTHER IMPORTANT
DATES
New Year’s Day

January 1

Sir John A. Macdonald Day

January 11

Good Friday

Friday immediately preceding
Easter Sunday

Easter Monday

Monday immediately following
Easter Sunday

Vimy Day

April 9

Victoria Day

Monday preceding May 25
(Sovereign’s birthday)

Fête nationale (Quebec)

June 24 (Feast of St. John the
Baptist)

Canada Day

July 1

Labour Day

First Monday of September

Thanksgiving Day

Second Monday of October

Remembrance Day

November 11

Sir Wilfrid Laurier Day

November 20

Christmas Day

December 25

Boxing Day

December 26
89

	  

