Study Questions
One of the basic requirements of citizenship is to demonstrate
that you have adequate knowledge of Canada. The citizenship
test is used to assess your knowledge of Canada and the rights
and responsibilities of being a citizen in Canada.
All the citizenship test questions are based on information
provided in this study guide. You will be asked about facts and
ideas presented in the guide.
The questions below are similar to the questions that are
found on the citizenship test. Use these questions to
prepare for your test. All the answers can be found in this
study guide.
What are three responsibilities of citizenship?
a)

Being loyal to Canada, recycling newspapers, serving in
the navy, army or air force.

b)

Obeying the law, taking responsibility for oneself and
one’s family, serving on a jury.

c)

Learning both official languages, voting in elections,
belonging to a union.

d)

Buying Canadian products, owning your own business,
using less water.

106
	  

What is the meaning of the Remembrance Day poppy?
a)

To remember our Sovereign, Queen Elizabeth II.

b)

To celebrate Confederation.

c)

To honour prime ministers who have died.

d)

To remember the sacrifice of Canadians who have
served or died in wars up to the present day.

How are members of Parliament chosen?
a)

They are appointed by the United Nations.

b)

They are chosen by the provincial premiers.

c)

They are elected by voters in their local constituency
(riding).

d)

They are elected by landowners and police chiefs.

107
	  

OTHER STUDY QUESTIONS
Name two key documents that contain our rights and freedoms.
Identify four (4) rights that Canadians enjoy.
Name four (4) fundamental freedoms that Canadians enjoy.
What is meant by the equality of women and men?
What are some examples of taking responsibility for yourself
and your family?
Who were the founding peoples of Canada?
Who are the Métis?
What does the word “Inuit” mean?
What is meant by the term “responsible government”?
Who was Sir Louis-Hippolyte La Fontaine?
What did the Canadian Pacific Railway symbolize?
What does Confederation mean?
What is the significance of the discovery of insulin by Sir
Frederick Banting and Charles Best?
108
	  

What does it mean to say that Canada is a constitutional
monarchy?
What are the three branches of government?
What is the difference between the role of the Queen and that
of the Prime Minister?
What is the highest honour that Canadians can receive?
When you go to vote on election day, what do you do?
Who is entitled to vote in Canadian federal elections?
In Canada, are you obliged to tell other people how you voted?
After an election, which party forms the government?
Who is your member of Parliament?
What are the three levels of government?
What is the role of the courts in Canada?
In Canada, are you allowed to question the police about their
service or conduct?
Name two Canadian symbols.
109
	  

What provinces are sometimes referred to as the Atlantic
Provinces?
What is the capital of the province or territory that you live in?

110
	  

