Federal Elections
Canadians vote in elections for the people they want to
represent them in the House of Commons. In each election,
voters may re-elect the same members of the House of
Commons or choose new ones. Members of the House of
Commons are also known as members of Parliament or MPs.
Under legislation passed by Parliament, federal elections must
be held on the third Monday in October every four years
following the most recent general election. The Prime Minister
may ask the Governor General to call an earlier election.
Canada is divided into 308 electoral districts, also known as
ridings or constituencies. An electoral district is a geographical
area represented by a member of Parliament (MP). The
citizens in each electoral district elect one MP who sits in the
House of Commons to represent them, as well as all
Canadians.
Canadian citizens who are 18 years old or older may run in a
federal election. The people who run for office are called
candidates. There can be many candidates in an electoral
district.
The people in each electoral district vote for the candidate and
political party of their choice. The candidate who receives the
most votes becomes the MP for that electoral district.
Picture: House of Commons chamber
60
	  

VOTING
One of the privileges of Canadian citizenship is the right to
vote. You are eligible to vote in a federal election or cast a
ballot in a federal referendum if you are:
• a Canadian citizen; and
• at least 18 years old on voting day; and
• on the voters’ list.
The voters’ lists used during federal elections and referendums
are produced from the National Register of Electors by a
neutral agency of Parliament called Elections Canada. This is a
permanent database of Canadian citizens 18 years of age or
older who are qualified to vote in federal elections and
referendums.
Once an election has been called, Elections Canada mails a
voter information card to each elector whose name is in the
National Register of Electors. The card lists when and where
you vote and the number to call if you require an interpreter or
other special services.
Even if you choose not to be listed in the National Register of
Electors or do not receive a voter information card, you can still
be added to the voters’ list at any time, including on election
day.
To vote either on election day or at advance polls, go to the
polling station listed on your voter information card. (See voting
procedures)
61
	  

SECRET BALLOT
Canadian law secures the right to a secret ballot. This means
that no one can watch you vote and no one should look at how
you voted. You may choose to discuss how you voted with
others, but no one, including family members, your employer or
union representative, has the right to insist that you tell them
how you voted. Immediately after the polling stations close,
election officers count the ballots and the results are
announced on radio and television, and in the newspapers.
AFTER AN ELECTION
Ordinarily, after an election, the leader of the political party with
the most seats in the House of Commons is invited by the
Governor General to form the government. After being
appointed by the Governor General, the leader of this party
becomes the Prime Minister. If the party in power holds at least
half of the seats in the House of Commons, this is called a
majority government. If the party in power holds less than half
of the seats in the House of Commons, this is called a minority
government.
The Prime Minister and the party in power run the government
as long as they have the support or confidence of the majority
of the MPs. When the House of Commons votes on a major
issue such as the budget, this is considered a matter of
confidence. If a majority of the members of the House of
Commons vote against a major government decision, the party
in power is defeated, which usually results in the Prime Minister
asking the Governor General, on behalf of the Sovereign, to
call an election.
62
	  

The Prime Minister chooses the ministers of the Crown, most of
them from among members of the House of Commons.
Cabinet ministers are responsible for running the federal
government departments. The Prime Minister and the Cabinet
ministers are called the Cabinet and they make important
decisions about how the country is governed. They prepare the
budget and propose most new laws. Their decisions can be
questioned by all members of the House of Commons.
The other parties that are not in power are known as opposition
parties. The opposition party with the most members of the
House of Commons is the Official Opposition or Her Majesty’s
Loyal Opposition. The role of opposition parties is to peacefully
oppose or try to improve government proposals. There are
three major political parties currently represented in the House
of Commons: the Conservative Party, New Democratic Party
and Liberal Party.
Picture: House of Commons in session

63
	  

VOTING PROCEDURES DURING AN ELECTION PERIOD
1. Voter information card
Electors whose information is in the National Register of
Electors will receive a voter information card. This confirms that
your name is on the voters’ list and states when and where you
vote.
2. I did not get a card
If you do not receive a voter information card, call your local
elections office to ensure that you are on the voters’ list. If you
do not have the number, call Elections Canada, in Ottawa, at 1800-463-6868.
3. Advance poll and special ballot
If you cannot or do not wish to vote on election day, you can
vote at the advance polls or by special ballot. The dates and
location are on your voter information card.
4. On election day
Go to your polling station. The location is on your voter
information card. Bring this card and proof of your identity and
address to the polling station.

64
	  

5. Marking the ballot
Mark an “X” in the circle next to the name of the candidate of
your choice.
6. Voting is secret
Your vote is secret. You will be invited to go behind the screen
to mark your ballot. Once marked, fold it and present it to the
poll officials.
7. The ballot box
The poll official will tear off the ballot number and give your
ballot back to you to deposit in the ballot box.
8. The election results
When the polls close, every ballot is counted and the results
are made public. You can see the results on television or on
the Elections Canada website (www.elections.ca).

65
	  

OTHER LEVELS OF GOVERNMENT IN CANADA
Local or municipal government plays an important role in the
lives of our citizens. Municipal governments usually have a
council that passes laws called “by-laws” that affect only the
local community. The council usually includes a mayor (or a
reeve) and councillors or aldermen. Municipalities are normally
responsible for urban or regional planning, streets and roads,
sanitation (such as garbage removal), snow removal,
firefighting, ambulance and other emergency services,
recreation facilities, public transit and some local health and
social services. Most major urban centres have municipal
police forces.
Provincial, territorial and municipal elections are held by secret
ballot, but the rules are not the same as those for federal
elections. It is important to find out the rules for voting in
provincial, territorial and local elections so that you can
exercise your right to vote.
Picture: Provincial Assembly Charlottetown, P.E.I.

66
	  

Government
Federal

Elected Officials

Some Responsibilities

• Members of
Parliament (MPs)

• National Defence
• Foreign Policy
• Citizenship
• Policing
• Criminal Justice
• International Trade
• Aboriginal Affairs
• Immigration (shared)
• Agriculture (shared)
• Environment (shared)

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

67
	  

Provincial and
Territorial

• Members of the
Legislative
Assembly (MLA) or

• Education

• Members of the
National Assembly
(MNA) or

• Natural Resources

• Members of the
Provincial
Parliament (MPP) or
• Members of the
House of Assembly
(MHA)

• Health Care

• Highways
• Policing (Quebec,
Ontario)
• Property and Civil
Rights
• Immigration (shared)
• Agriculture (shared)
• Environment
(shared).

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

68
	  

Municipal
(local)

• Mayor or Reeve
• Councillors or
Aldermen

• Social and
Community Health
• Recycling Programs
• Transportation and
Utilities
• Snow Removal
• Policing
• Firefighting
• Emergency Services

The First Nations have band chiefs and councillors who have
major responsibilities on First Nations reserves, including
housing, schools and other services. There are a number of
provincial, regional and national Aboriginal organizations that
are a voice for First Nations, Métis and Inuit people in their
relationships with the federal, provincial and territorial
governments.

69
	  

HOW MUCH DO YOU KNOW ABOUT YOUR
GOVERNMENT?
Use these pages to take notes and to study important
information.
Federal Government
Head of State:

The name of the representative of the Queen of Canada, the
Governor General, is

The Head of Government, the Prime Minister, is

The name of the political party in power is

70
	  

The name of the Leader of the Opposition is

The name of the party representing Her Majesty’s Loyal
Opposition is

The names of the other opposition parties and leaders are

My Member of Parliament (MP) in Ottawa is

71
	  

My federal electoral district is called

Provincial Government
The representative of the Queen in my province, the Lieutenant
Governor, is

The Head of Government (the Premier) is

The name of the provincial party in power is

72
	  

The names of the provincial opposition parties and leaders are

My provincial representative is

Territorial Government
The name of the Commissioner, who represents the federal
government in my territory, is

The name of the Premier is

73
	  

The name of my territorial representative is

Municipal Government
The name of the municipality where I live is

The name of the head of the municipal government (mayor or
reeve) is

Picture: Quebec City Hall, constructed 1895-96

74
	  

